docs/quick-start.md, before:

# Quick start

```sh
npm install yay-machine         # or your package-manager of choice
```

## Define your machine at compile-time

```typescript
import assert from "assert"; 
import { defineMachine } from "yay-machine";

type HealthState = Readonly<{
  /**
   * checkHealth: transient decision state
   * invincible: DAMAGE events do not hurt, temporarily
   * thriving: strength + stamina are between 20 and 15
   * moderate: strength + stamina are between 15 and 10
   * surviving: strength + stamina are between 10 and 5
   * critical: strength + stamina are between 5 and 0
   */
  name: "checkHealth" | "invincible" | "thriving" | "moderate" | "surviving" | "critical" | "expired";
  strength: number; // 0..10 inclusive
  stamina: number; // 0..10 inclusive
  invincibilityStarted: number;
}>;

type HealthEvent = Readonly<
  | { type: "DAMAGE"; strength: number; stamina: number }
  | { type: "FIRST_AID"; strength: number; stamina: number }
  | { type: "GOD_LIKE"; compatibleWith: "human" | "reptile" }
  | { type: "HUMAN_AGAIN" }
>;

const applyFirstAid = (
  state: HealthState,
  event: Extract<HealthEvent, { type: "FIRST_AID" }>,
): Omit<HealthState, "name"> => ({
  ...state,
  strength: Math.min(state.strength + event.strength, 10),
  stamina: Math.min(state.stamina + event.stamina, 10),
});

/**
 * Player health component from a game
 */
export const healthMachine = defineMachine<HealthState, HealthEvent>({
  enableCopyDataOnTransition: true,
  initialState: { name: "checkHealth", strength: 10, stamina: 10, invincibilityStarted: 0 },
  states: {
    checkHealth: {
      always: [
        {
          to: "thriving",
          when: ({ state }) => state.strength + state.stamina > 15,
        },
        {
          to: "moderate",
          when: ({ state }) => state.strength + state.stamina > 10,
        },
        {
          to: "surviving",
          when: ({ state }) => state.strength + state.stamina > 5,
        },
        {
          to: "critical",
          when: ({ state }) => state.strength + state.stamina > 0,
        },
        {
          to: "expired",
        },
      ],
    },
    invincible: {
      onEnter: ({ state, send }) => {
        const timer = setTimeout(
          () => send({ type: "HUMAN_AGAIN" }),
          performance.now() - state.invincibilityStarted - 10_000,
        );
        return () => clearTimeout(timer);
      },
      on: {
        FIRST_AID: {
          to: "invincible",
          data: ({ state, event }) => applyFirstAid(state, event),
        },
        DAMAGE: { to: "invincible" },
        HUMAN_AGAIN: { to: "checkHealth", data: ({ state }) => ({ ...state, invincibilityStarted: 0 }) },
      },
    },
  },
  on: {
    GOD_LIKE: {
      to: "invincible",
      when: ({ event }) => event.compatibleWith === "human",
      data: ({ state }) => ({ ...state, invincibilityStarted: performance.now() }),
    },
    DAMAGE: {
      to: "checkHealth",
      data: ({ state, event }) => ({
        strength: Math.max(state.strength - event.strength, 0),
        stamina: Math.max(state.stamina - event.stamina, 0),
        invincibilityStarted: 0,
      }),
    },
    FIRST_AID: {
      to: "checkHealth",
      data: ({ state, event }) => applyFirstAid(state, event),
    },
  },
});
```

## Create instances and operate them at run-time

```typescript
const health = healthMachine.newInstance().start();
health.subscribe(({ state }) => {
  if (state.name === "expired") {
    console.log("GAME OVER");
  }
});
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "thriving", strength: 10, stamina: 10, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 1, strength: 3 });
health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 2, strength: 1 });
health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 1, strength: 1 });
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "moderate", strength: 5, stamina: 6, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

health.send({ type: "FIRST_AID", stamina: 5, strength: 5 });
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "thriving", strength: 10, stamina: 10, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 4, strength: 3 });
health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 5, strength: 4 });
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "critical", strength: 3, stamina: 1, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

health.send({ type: "GOD_LIKE", compatibleWith: "human" });
const invincibilityStarted = health.state.invincibilityStarted; // performance.now()
assert(invincibilityStarted > 0);
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "invincible", strength: 3, stamina: 1, invincibilityStarted });

health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 9, strength: 7 });
health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 7, strength: 6 });
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "invincible", strength: 3, stamina: 1, invincibilityStarted }); // still

health.send({ type: "FIRST_AID", stamina: 5, strength: 5 });
health.send({ type: "HUMAN_AGAIN" }); // test usage - it's supposed to be sent from a side-effect via a timer
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "moderate", strength: 8, stamina: 6, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

// etc ...
```

# Reference docs

Read the [reference docs](./reference/readme.md) to find out more.

Commit message:

docs: sync examples in docs from example source files
This change adds tooling to automate keeping the examples in the docs (markdown files) up-to-date.

`scripts/sync-docs.ts` now searches the docs for "💡 View this example..." (links to GitHub) then
extracts the example's filename and updates the source code in the docs from the file.

It should also fail the build when the docs are out-of-date vs example sources,
so examples in READMEs etc should be working from now on.

docs/quick-start.md, after:

# Quick start

```sh
npm install yay-machine         # or your package-manager of choice
```

## Define your machine at compile-time

> 💡 View this example's <a href="https://github.com/maurice/yay-machine/blob/main/packages/example-machines/src/healthMachine.ts" target="_blank">source</a> and <a href="https://github.com/maurice/yay-machine/blob/main/packages/example-machines/src/__tests__/healthMachine.test.ts" target="_blank">test</a> on GitHub

```typescript
import assert from "assert";
import { defineMachine } from "yay-machine";

type HealthState = Readonly<{
  /**
   * checkHealth: transient decision state
   * invincible: DAMAGE events do not hurt, temporarily
   * thriving: strength + stamina are between 20 and 15
   * moderate: strength + stamina are between 15 and 10
   * surviving: strength + stamina are between 10 and 5
   * critical: strength + stamina are between 5 and 0
   */
  name: "checkHealth" | "invincible" | "thriving" | "moderate" | "surviving" | "critical" | "expired";
  strength: number; // 0..10 inclusive
  stamina: number; // 0..10 inclusive
  invincibilityStarted: number;
}>;

type HealthEvent = Readonly<
  | { type: "DAMAGE"; strength: number; stamina: number }
  | { type: "FIRST_AID"; strength: number; stamina: number }
  | { type: "GOD_LIKE"; compatibleWith: "human" | "reptile" }
  | { type: "HUMAN_AGAIN" }
>;

const applyFirstAid = (
  state: HealthState,
  event: Extract<HealthEvent, { type: "FIRST_AID" }>,
): Omit<HealthState, "name"> => ({
  ...state,
  strength: Math.min(state.strength + event.strength, 10),
  stamina: Math.min(state.stamina + event.stamina, 10),
});

/**
 * Player health component from a game
 */
export const healthMachine = defineMachine<HealthState, HealthEvent>({
  enableCopyDataOnTransition: true,
  initialState: { name: "checkHealth", strength: 10, stamina: 10, invincibilityStarted: 0 },
  states: {
    checkHealth: {
      always: [
        {
          to: "thriving",
          when: ({ state }) => state.strength + state.stamina > 15,
        },
        {
          to: "moderate",
          when: ({ state }) => state.strength + state.stamina > 10,
        },
        {
          to: "surviving",
          when: ({ state }) => state.strength + state.stamina > 5,
        },
        {
          to: "critical",
          when: ({ state }) => state.strength + state.stamina > 0,
        },
        {
          to: "expired",
        },
      ],
    },
    invincible: {
      onEnter: ({ state, send }) => {
        const timer = setTimeout(
          () => send({ type: "HUMAN_AGAIN" }),
          performance.now() - state.invincibilityStarted - 10_000,
        );
        return () => clearTimeout(timer);
      },
      on: {
        FIRST_AID: {
          to: "invincible",
          data: ({ state, event }) => applyFirstAid(state, event),
        },
        DAMAGE: { to: "invincible", reenter: false },
        HUMAN_AGAIN: { to: "checkHealth", data: ({ state }) => ({ ...state, invincibilityStarted: 0 }) },
      },
    },
  },
  on: {
    GOD_LIKE: {
      to: "invincible",
      when: ({ event }) => event.compatibleWith === "human",
      data: ({ state }) => ({ ...state, invincibilityStarted: performance.now() }),
    },
    DAMAGE: {
      to: "checkHealth",
      data: ({ state, event }) => ({
        strength: Math.max(state.strength - event.strength, 0),
        stamina: Math.max(state.stamina - event.stamina, 0),
        invincibilityStarted: 0,
      }),
    },
    FIRST_AID: {
      to: "checkHealth",
      data: ({ state, event }) => applyFirstAid(state, event),
    },
  },
});
```

## Create instances and operate them at run-time

```typescript
const health = healthMachine.newInstance().start();
health.subscribe(({ state }) => {
  if (state.name === "expired") {
    console.log("GAME OVER");
  }
});
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "thriving", strength: 10, stamina: 10, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 1, strength: 3 });
health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 2, strength: 1 });
health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 1, strength: 1 });
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "moderate", strength: 5, stamina: 6, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

health.send({ type: "FIRST_AID", stamina: 5, strength: 5 });
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "thriving", strength: 10, stamina: 10, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 4, strength: 3 });
health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 5, strength: 4 });
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "critical", strength: 3, stamina: 1, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

health.send({ type: "GOD_LIKE", compatibleWith: "human" });
const invincibilityStarted = health.state.invincibilityStarted; // performance.now()
assert(invincibilityStarted > 0);
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "invincible", strength: 3, stamina: 1, invincibilityStarted });

health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 9, strength: 7 });
health.send({ type: "DAMAGE", stamina: 7, strength: 6 });
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "invincible", strength: 3, stamina: 1, invincibilityStarted }); // still

health.send({ type: "FIRST_AID", stamina: 5, strength: 5 });
health.send({ type: "HUMAN_AGAIN" }); // test usage - it's supposed to be sent from a side-effect via a timer
assert.deepStrictEqual(health.state, { name: "moderate", strength: 8, stamina: 6, invincibilityStarted: 0 });

// etc ...
```

# Reference docs

Read the [reference docs](./reference/readme.md) to find out more.
