docs/reference/transitions.md, before:

# Transitions

Transitions bring state-machines to life, defining when and how they move from state-to-state.

## Connection Machine

We will expand on the "connection machine" example we used when explaining [states](./state.md) and [events](./events.md), to illustrate various transitions.

> 😜 This is an example, created for teaching purposes - don't take it too seriously 

First, here is the complete machine. In the following sections we explore the various different transition techniques it uses.

```typescript
import { defineMachine } from "yay-machine";

/*
 * Fictitious external "transport / connection" API
 */

interface Transport {
  connect(url: string): Connection;
}

interface Connection {
  onconnect?: (connectionId: string) => void;
  onmessage?: (data: string) => void;
  onerror?: (error: ConnectionError) => void;
  send(data: string): void;
  disconnect(): void;
}

interface ConnectionError {
  readonly code: number;
  readonly errorMessage: string;
}

/*
 * Application connection state-machine
 */

interface CommonState<Name extends string> {
  readonly name: Name;
  readonly maxReconnectionAttempts: number;
  readonly log: (message: string) => void;
  readonly transport: Transport;
  readonly onReceive: (data: string) => void;
  readonly lastHeartbeatTime: number;
}

interface DisconnectedState extends CommonState<"disconnected"> {}

interface ConnectionAttemptState {
  readonly url: string;
  readonly connectionAttemptNum: number;
}

interface ConnectingState extends CommonState<"connecting">, ConnectionAttemptState {}

interface ReattemptConnectionState extends CommonState<"reattemptConnection">, ConnectionAttemptState {}

interface ConnectedState extends CommonState<"connected">, ConnectionAttemptState {
  readonly connectionId: string;
  readonly connection: Connection;
}

interface ConnectionErrorState extends CommonState<"connectionError">, ConnectionAttemptState {
  readonly errorMessage: string;
}

type ConnectionState =
  | DisconnectedState
  | ConnectingState
  | ReattemptConnectionState
  | ConnectedState
  | ConnectionErrorState;

type ConnectionEvent =
  | { readonly type: "CONNECT"; readonly url: string }
  | { readonly type: "CONNECTED"; readonly connectionId: string; readonly connection: Connection }
  | { readonly type: "SEND"; readonly data: string }
  | { readonly type: "CONNECTION_ERROR"; readonly code: number; readonly errorMessage: string }
  | { readonly type: "HEARTBEAT" }
  | { readonly type: "DISCONNECT" }
  | { readonly type: "DISCONNECTED" };

const isAuthError = (code: number) => code === 401 || code === 403;

/**
 * Models a client connection via a fictitious "transport / connection" API.
 * Demonstrates various transitions configurations:
 * - specific state + event
 * - any state + event
 * - immediate
 * - conditionals, single and multi
 * - `reenter:false`
 */
export const connectionMachine = defineMachine<ConnectionState, ConnectionEvent>({
  initialState: {
    name: "disconnected",
    maxReconnectionAttempts: 10,
    log: undefined!, // provided at runtime, per machine-instance
    transport: undefined!, // provided at runtime, per machine-instance
    onReceive: undefined!, // provided at runtime, per machine-instance
    lastHeartbeatTime: -1,
  },
  states: {
    disconnected: {
      on: {
        CONNECT: {
          to: "connecting",
          data: ({ state, event: { url } }) => ({ ...state, url, connectionAttemptNum: 1 }),
        },
      },
    },
    connecting: {
      onEnter: ({ state: { log, transport, url, onReceive }, send }) => {
        log(`connecting to ${url}`);
        const connection = transport.connect(url);
        connection.onconnect = (connectionId) => send({ type: "CONNECTED", connectionId, connection });
        connection.onerror = (error) => send({ type: "CONNECTION_ERROR", ...error });
        connection.onmessage = (data) => {
          if (data === "❤️ HEARTBEAT") {
            send({ type: "HEARTBEAT" });
          } else {
            onReceive(data);
          }
        };
      },
      on: {
        CONNECTED: {
          to: "connected",
          data: ({ state, event: { connectionId, connection } }) => ({
            ...state,
            connectionId,
            connection,
          }),
        },
        CONNECTION_ERROR: [
          {
            to: "connectionError",
            when: ({ event }) => isAuthError(event.code),
            data: ({ state, event: { errorMessage } }) => ({ ...state, errorMessage }),
          },
          {
            to: "reattemptConnection",
            data: ({ state }) => state,
          },
        ],
      },
    },
    connected: {
      onEnter: ({ state }) => {
        state.log(`connected to ${state.url}`);
      },
      onExit: ({ state }) => {
        state.log(`disconnecting from ${state.url}`);
        state.connection.disconnect();
      },
      on: {
        SEND: {
          to: "connected",
          reenter: false,
          onTransition: ({ state, event }) => {
            state.connection.send(event.data);
          },
        },
        CONNECTION_ERROR: {
          to: "reattemptConnection",
          data: ({ state }) => ({ ...state, connectionAttemptNum: 0 }),
        },
      },
    },
    reattemptConnection: {
      onEnter: ({ state: { log, url }, send }) => {
        log("waiting to re-attempt connection...");
        const timer = setTimeout(() => send({ type: "CONNECT", url }), Math.round(Math.random() * 10_000));
        return () => clearTimeout(timer);
      },
      on: {
        CONNECT: {
          to: "connecting",
          data: ({ state, event: { url } }) => ({
            ...state,
            url,
            connectionAttemptNum: state.connectionAttemptNum + 1,
          }),
          onTransition: ({ state: { log, url } }) => {
            log(`re-attempting connection to ${url}`);
          },
        },
      },
      always: {
        to: "connectionError",
        when: ({ state: { connectionAttemptNum, maxReconnectionAttempts } }) =>
          connectionAttemptNum === maxReconnectionAttempts,
        data: ({ state }) => ({
          ...state,
          errorMessage: `Max connection attempts (${state.connectionAttemptNum}) reached for url=${state.url}`,
        }),
      },
    },
  },
  on: {
    HEARTBEAT: { data: ({ state }) => ({ ...state, lastHeartbeatTime: Date.now() }) },
    DISCONNECT: {
      to: "disconnected",
      data: ({ state: { maxReconnectionAttempts, log, transport, onReceive } }) => ({
        maxReconnectionAttempts,
        log,
        transport,
        onReceive,
        lastHeartbeatTime: -1,
      }),
    },
  },
});
```

### Usage

```typescript
const transport: Transport = {
  // @ts-expect-error - example code
  connect(url: string) {
    return {
      /* ... */
    };
  },
};

const onReceive = (data: string) => {
  console.log("received from server: ", data);
};

const connection = connectionMachine
  .newInstance({
    initialState: {
      name: "disconnected",
      maxReconnectionAttempts: 10,
      log: console.log.bind(console),
      transport,
      onReceive,
    },
  })
  .start();

connection.subscribe(({ state }) => {
  if (state.name === "connected") {
    connection.send({ type: "SEND", data: "hello from client" });
  }
});

connection.send({ type: "CONNECT", url: "foo://bar/baz" });
```

## In State, On Event

The simplest and most obvious types of transition are done in a specific state, because of a specific event.

In the above machine we see this for 

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    disconnected --> connecting: CONNECT
```

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    connecting --> connected: CONNECTED
```

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    connected --> reattemptConnection: CONNECTION_ERROR
```

(And elsewhere.)

These types of transitions are defined at `states[stateName].on[EVENT_NAME]` in the definition config

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  states: {
    [stateName]: {
      on: {
        [EVENT_NAME]: { 
          to: 'nextStateName',
          /* ... other options ... */ 
        },
        // ...
      },
    },
    // ...
  },
});
```

### Add `reenter: false` to remain in the same state

In some cases we want to handle an event in a specific state, and remain in the same state, without exiting and re-entering the state.

In the above machine we see this happens for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    connected --> connected: SEND
```

This can be used to perform some **transition side-effect** and still keep any previous **state entry side-effect** active (ie, not call its cleanup function).

Simply add `reenter: false` to the transition

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  states: {
    [stateName]: {
      on: {
        [EVENT_NAME]: { 
          to: stateName,                                        // remain in current state
          reenter: false,
          onTransition: ({ state, event }) => ({ /* ... */ })   // optional side-effect
        },
        // ...
      },
    },
    // ...
  },
});
```

## Any State, On Event

In some cases it's more convenient to handle an event in *any state*.

In the above machine we see this for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    any_state --> disconnected: DISCONNECT
```

These types of transitions are defined at `on[EVENT_NAME]` in the definition config

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  // ...
  on {
    [EVENT_NAME]: { 
      to: 'nextStateName',
      /* ... other options ... */ 
    },
  },
});
```

### `to` is optional in *any state* transitions

Sometimes we want to handle an event in *any state* and then **return to the current state**.

In the above machine we see this for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    any_state --> current_state: HEARTBEAT
```

This technique is typically used to update state-data (eg, in the connection machine, it has this transition to update `lastHeartbeatTime`)


```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  // ...
  on {
    [EVENT_NAME]: { 
      data: ({ state, event }) => ({ ...state, /* ... */ }),
    },
  },
});
```

## Conditional transitions: the `when()` callback

Wherever you can define a transition, you can also define an array of transitions, where some or all have a `when()` callback.

In the above machine we see this happens for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    state when <<choice>>
    direction LR
    connecting --> when: CONNECTION_ERROR
    when --> connectionError: if auth error
    when --> attemptReconnection: else
```

The `when()` callback takes the current `state` and `event`, and SHOULD be pure and deterministic, ie, only using `state` and `event` to decide which transition to take.

Transitions are attempted in order and the first `when()` to return `true`, or first transition without a `when()`, is taken. If no `when()`s return true, no transitions are taken.

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  states: {
    [stateName]: {
      on: {
        [EVENT_NAME]: [
          { to: 'firstState', when: ({ state, event }) => { /* ... */ }, /* ... other options */ },
          { to: 'firstState', when: ({ state, event }) => { /* ... */ }, /* ... other options */ },
          { to: 'secondState', when: ({ state, event }) => { /* ... */ }, /* ... other options */ },
          { to: 'thirdState', /* ... other options */ },
        ]
      }
    }
    // ...
  },
  on {
    [OTHER_EVENT_NAME]: [
      // array of potential transitions
    ],
  },
});
```

## Immediate (always) transitions

Immediate transitions (often combined with conditional transitions) are taken immediately, on entering a state.

In the above machine we see this happens for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    state when <<choice>>
    direction LR
    attemptReconnect --> when
    when --> connectionError: if max attempts reached
```

Immediate transitions are optionally defined in state nodes in the definition config at `states[stateName].always`

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  states: {
    [stateName]: {
      always: [{ /* transition(s) */ }] 
    }
  },
  // ...
});
```

## Generating data for the next state: the `data()` callback

Since states can have associated data, you often need to provide a `data()` callback in the transition to generate the data for the next state.

This callback MUST only ever generate a new object. DO NOT mutate the current state data.

The callback receives the current `state` and `event`.

The callback SHOULD be pure and deterministic, and only use data from `state` and `event` to compute the data for the next state.

For *homogenous* state-data you also have the option to set `enableCopyDataOnTransition: true` to avoid some boilerplate. See the [states](./state.md) documentation for a longer discussion.

## Combining different types of transition and options

Many of the above options are able to be combined, eg

- all the different transition configuration nodes (state + event, *any state* + event, always) all support single and multiple transitions
- all the different transition configuration nodes support `when()`, `data()` and `onTransition()`
- state transition configuration MAY combine event and always transitions (the `reattemptConnection` state does this)

The two *special cases* in the configuration are

- no `to` in an *any state* transition means exit and re-enter the current state, updating data if relevant
- `reenter: false` in a state + event transition means perform the optional side-effect but do not exit re-enter the current state or update data

## Transition side-effects: the `onTransition()` callback

Transitions can define side-effects: an `onTransition()` function that is called if and when the transition is taken.

In the above state machine there are transition side effects when handling

- the `SEND` event in the `connected` state
- the `CONNECT` event in the `reattemptConnection` state

The `onTransition()` function receives the current `state`, `event`, the `next` state and a `send` function which can be used to send events back to the machine instance. It MAY return a cleanup function to release any associated resources, and if so that is called immediately after the `onTransition()` itself.

---

* [⬅️ Previous: **Events**](./events.md)
* [Next: **Side-effects** ➡️](./side-effects.md)

Commit message:

docs: sync examples in docs from example source files
This change adds tooling to automate keeping the examples in the docs (markdown files) up-to-date.

`scripts/sync-docs.ts` now searches the docs for "💡 View this example..." (links to GitHub) then
extracts the example's filename and updates the source code in the docs from the file.

It should also fail the build when the docs are out-of-date vs example sources,
so examples in READMEs etc should be working from now on.

docs/reference/transitions.md, after:

# Transitions

Transitions bring state-machines to life, defining when and how they move from state-to-state.

## Connection Machine

We will expand on the "connection machine" example we used when explaining [states](./state.md) and [events](./events.md), to illustrate various transitions.

> 😜 This is an example, created for teaching purposes - don't take it too seriously 

First, here is the complete machine. In the following sections we explore the various different transition techniques it uses.

> 💡 View this example's <a href="https://github.com/maurice/yay-machine/blob/main/packages/example-machines/src/connectionMachine.ts" target="_blank">source</a> and <a href="https://github.com/maurice/yay-machine/blob/main/packages/example-machines/src/__tests__/connectionMachine.test.ts" target="_blank">test</a> on GitHub

```typescript
import { defineMachine } from "yay-machine";

/*
 * Fictitious external "transport / connection" API
 */

interface Transport {
  connect(url: string): Connection;
}

interface Connection {
  onconnect?: (connectionId: string) => void;
  onmessage?: (data: string) => void;
  onerror?: (error: ConnectionError) => void;
  send(data: string): void;
  disconnect(): void;
}

interface ConnectionError {
  readonly code: number;
  readonly errorMessage: string;
}

/*
 * Application connection state-machine
 */

interface CommonState<Name extends string> {
  readonly name: Name;
  readonly maxReconnectionAttempts: number;
  readonly log: (message: string) => void;
  readonly transport: Transport;
  readonly onReceive: (data: string) => void;
  readonly lastHeartbeatTime: number;
}

interface DisconnectedState extends CommonState<"disconnected"> {}

interface ConnectionAttemptState {
  readonly url: string;
  readonly connectionAttemptNum: number;
}

interface ConnectingState extends CommonState<"connecting">, ConnectionAttemptState {}

interface ReattemptConnectionState extends CommonState<"reattemptConnection">, ConnectionAttemptState {}

interface ConnectedState extends CommonState<"connected">, ConnectionAttemptState {
  readonly connectionId: string;
  readonly connection: Connection;
}

interface ConnectionErrorState extends CommonState<"connectionError">, ConnectionAttemptState {
  readonly errorMessage: string;
}

type ConnectionState =
  | DisconnectedState
  | ConnectingState
  | ReattemptConnectionState
  | ConnectedState
  | ConnectionErrorState;

type ConnectionEvent =
  | { readonly type: "CONNECT"; readonly url: string }
  | { readonly type: "CONNECTED"; readonly connectionId: string; readonly connection: Connection }
  | { readonly type: "SEND"; readonly data: string }
  | { readonly type: "CONNECTION_ERROR"; readonly code: number; readonly errorMessage: string }
  | { readonly type: "HEARTBEAT" }
  | { readonly type: "DISCONNECT" }
  | { readonly type: "DISCONNECTED" };

const isAuthError = (code: number) => code === 401 || code === 403;

/**
 * Models a client connection via a fictitious "transport / connection" API.
 * Demonstrates various transitions configurations:
 * - specific state + event
 * - any state + event
 * - immediate
 * - conditionals, single and multi
 * - `reenter:false`
 */
export const connectionMachine = defineMachine<ConnectionState, ConnectionEvent>({
  initialState: {
    name: "disconnected",
    maxReconnectionAttempts: 10,
    log: undefined!, // provided at runtime, per machine-instance
    transport: undefined!, // provided at runtime, per machine-instance
    onReceive: undefined!, // provided at runtime, per machine-instance
    lastHeartbeatTime: -1,
  },
  states: {
    disconnected: {
      on: {
        CONNECT: {
          to: "connecting",
          data: ({ state, event: { url } }) => ({ ...state, url, connectionAttemptNum: 1 }),
        },
      },
    },
    connecting: {
      onEnter: ({ state: { log, transport, url, onReceive }, send }) => {
        log(`connecting to ${url}`);
        const connection = transport.connect(url);
        connection.onconnect = (connectionId) => send({ type: "CONNECTED", connectionId, connection });
        connection.onerror = (error) => send({ type: "CONNECTION_ERROR", ...error });
        connection.onmessage = (data) => {
          if (data === "❤️ HEARTBEAT") {
            send({ type: "HEARTBEAT" });
          } else {
            onReceive(data);
          }
        };
      },
      on: {
        CONNECTED: {
          to: "connected",
          data: ({ state, event: { connectionId, connection } }) => ({
            ...state,
            connectionId,
            connection,
          }),
        },
        CONNECTION_ERROR: [
          {
            to: "connectionError",
            when: ({ event }) => isAuthError(event.code),
            data: ({ state, event: { errorMessage } }) => ({ ...state, errorMessage }),
          },
          {
            to: "reattemptConnection",
            data: ({ state }) => state,
          },
        ],
      },
    },
    connected: {
      onEnter: ({ state }) => {
        state.log(`connected to ${state.url}`);
      },
      onExit: ({ state }) => {
        state.log(`disconnecting from ${state.url}`);
        state.connection.disconnect();
      },
      on: {
        SEND: {
          to: "connected",
          reenter: false,
          onTransition: ({ state, event }) => {
            state.connection.send(event.data);
          },
        },
        CONNECTION_ERROR: {
          to: "reattemptConnection",
          data: ({ state }) => ({ ...state, connectionAttemptNum: 0 }),
        },
      },
    },
    reattemptConnection: {
      onEnter: ({ state: { log, url }, send }) => {
        log("waiting to re-attempt connection...");
        const timer = setTimeout(() => send({ type: "CONNECT", url }), Math.round(Math.random() * 10_000));
        return () => clearTimeout(timer);
      },
      on: {
        CONNECT: {
          to: "connecting",
          data: ({ state, event: { url } }) => ({
            ...state,
            url,
            connectionAttemptNum: state.connectionAttemptNum + 1,
          }),
          onTransition: ({ state: { log, url } }) => {
            log(`re-attempting connection to ${url}`);
          },
        },
      },
      always: {
        to: "connectionError",
        when: ({ state: { connectionAttemptNum, maxReconnectionAttempts } }) =>
          connectionAttemptNum === maxReconnectionAttempts,
        data: ({ state }) => ({
          ...state,
          errorMessage: `Max connection attempts (${state.connectionAttemptNum}) reached for url=${state.url}`,
        }),
      },
    },
  },
  on: {
    HEARTBEAT: { data: ({ state }) => ({ ...state, lastHeartbeatTime: Date.now() }) },
    DISCONNECT: {
      to: "disconnected",
      data: ({ state: { maxReconnectionAttempts, log, transport, onReceive } }) => ({
        maxReconnectionAttempts,
        log,
        transport,
        onReceive,
        lastHeartbeatTime: -1,
      }),
    },
  },
});
```

### Usage

```typescript
const transport: Transport = {
  // @ts-expect-error - example code
  connect(url: string) {
    return {
      /* ... */
    };
  },
};

const onReceive = (data: string) => {
  console.log("received from server: ", data);
};

const connection = connectionMachine
  .newInstance({
    initialState: {
      name: "disconnected",
      maxReconnectionAttempts: 10,
      log: console.log.bind(console),
      transport,
      onReceive,
      lastHeartbeatTime: -1,
    },
  })
  .start();

connection.subscribe(({ state }) => {
  if (state.name === "connected") {
    connection.send({ type: "SEND", data: "hello from client" });
  }
});

connection.send({ type: "CONNECT", url: "foo://bar/baz" });
```

## In State, On Event

The simplest and most obvious types of transition are done in a specific state, because of a specific event.

In the above machine we see this for 

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    disconnected --> connecting: CONNECT
```

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    connecting --> connected: CONNECTED
```

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    connected --> reattemptConnection: CONNECTION_ERROR
```

(And elsewhere.)

These types of transitions are defined at `states[stateName].on[EVENT_NAME]` in the definition config

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  states: {
    [stateName]: {
      on: {
        [EVENT_NAME]: { 
          to: 'nextStateName',
          /* ... other options ... */ 
        },
        // ...
      },
    },
    // ...
  },
});
```

### Add `reenter: false` to remain in the same state

In some cases we want to handle an event in a specific state, and remain in the same state, without exiting and re-entering the state.

In the above machine we see this happens for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    connected --> connected: SEND
```

This can be used to perform some **transition side-effect** and still keep any previous **state entry side-effect** active (ie, not call its cleanup function).

Simply add `reenter: false` to the transition

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  states: {
    [stateName]: {
      on: {
        [EVENT_NAME]: { 
          to: stateName,                                        // remain in current state
          reenter: false,
          onTransition: ({ state, event }) => ({ /* ... */ })   // optional side-effect
        },
        // ...
      },
    },
    // ...
  },
});
```

## Any State, On Event

In some cases it's more convenient to handle an event in *any state*.

In the above machine we see this for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    any_state --> disconnected: DISCONNECT
```

These types of transitions are defined at `on[EVENT_NAME]` in the definition config

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  // ...
  on {
    [EVENT_NAME]: { 
      to: 'nextStateName',
      /* ... other options ... */ 
    },
  },
});
```

### `to` is optional in *any state* transitions

Sometimes we want to handle an event in *any state* and then **return to the current state**.

In the above machine we see this for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    direction LR
    any_state --> current_state: HEARTBEAT
```

This technique is typically used to update state-data (eg, in the connection machine, it has this transition to update `lastHeartbeatTime`)


```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  // ...
  on {
    [EVENT_NAME]: { 
      data: ({ state, event }) => ({ ...state, /* ... */ }),
    },
  },
});
```

## Conditional transitions: the `when()` callback

Wherever you can define a transition, you can also define an array of transitions, where some or all have a `when()` callback.

In the above machine we see this happens for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    state when <<choice>>
    direction LR
    connecting --> when: CONNECTION_ERROR
    when --> connectionError: if auth error
    when --> attemptReconnection: else
```

The `when()` callback takes the current `state` and `event`, and SHOULD be pure and deterministic, ie, only using `state` and `event` to decide which transition to take.

Transitions are attempted in order and the first `when()` to return `true`, or first transition without a `when()`, is taken. If no `when()`s return true, no transitions are taken.

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  states: {
    [stateName]: {
      on: {
        [EVENT_NAME]: [
          { to: 'firstState', when: ({ state, event }) => { /* ... */ }, /* ... other options */ },
          { to: 'firstState', when: ({ state, event }) => { /* ... */ }, /* ... other options */ },
          { to: 'secondState', when: ({ state, event }) => { /* ... */ }, /* ... other options */ },
          { to: 'thirdState', /* ... other options */ },
        ]
      }
    }
    // ...
  },
  on {
    [OTHER_EVENT_NAME]: [
      // array of potential transitions
    ],
  },
});
```

## Immediate (always) transitions

Immediate transitions (often combined with conditional transitions) are taken immediately, on entering a state.

In the above machine we see this happens for

```mermaid
stateDiagram
    state when <<choice>>
    direction LR
    attemptReconnect --> when
    when --> connectionError: if max attempts reached
```

Immediate transitions are optionally defined in state nodes in the definition config at `states[stateName].always`

```typescript
const machine = defineMachine<State, Event>({
  states: {
    [stateName]: {
      always: [{ /* transition(s) */ }] 
    }
  },
  // ...
});
```

## Generating data for the next state: the `data()` callback

Since states can have associated data, you often need to provide a `data()` callback in the transition to generate the data for the next state.

This callback MUST only ever generate a new object. DO NOT mutate the current state data.

The callback receives the current `state` and `event`.

The callback SHOULD be pure and deterministic, and only use data from `state` and `event` to compute the data for the next state.

For *homogenous* state-data you also have the option to set `enableCopyDataOnTransition: true` to avoid some boilerplate. See the [states](./state.md) documentation for a longer discussion.

## Combining different types of transition and options

Many of the above options are able to be combined, eg

- all the different transition configuration nodes (state + event, *any state* + event, always) all support single and multiple transitions
- all the different transition configuration nodes support `when()`, `data()` and `onTransition()`
- state transition configuration MAY combine event and always transitions (the `reattemptConnection` state does this)

The two *special cases* in the configuration are

- no `to` in an *any state* transition means exit and re-enter the current state, updating data if relevant
- `reenter: false` in a state + event transition means perform the optional side-effect but do not exit re-enter the current state or update data

## Transition side-effects: the `onTransition()` callback

Transitions can define side-effects: an `onTransition()` function that is called if and when the transition is taken.

In the above state machine there are transition side effects when handling

- the `SEND` event in the `connected` state
- the `CONNECT` event in the `reattemptConnection` state

The `onTransition()` function receives the current `state`, `event`, the `next` state and a `send` function which can be used to send events back to the machine instance. It MAY return a cleanup function to release any associated resources, and if so that is called immediately after the `onTransition()` itself.

---

* [⬅️ Previous: **Events**](./events.md)
* [Next: **Side-effects** ➡️](./side-effects.md)
